Citation: Mathiane, M.J.; Tu, C.;
Adewale, P .; Nawej, M. A Vehicle
Density Estimation Trafﬁc Light
Control System Using a
Two-Dimensional Convolution
Neural Network. Vehicles 2023 ,5,
1844–1862. https://doi.org/
10.3390/vehicles5040099
Academic Editors: Peter Gaspar and
Junnian Wang
Received: 13 November 2023
Revised: 10 December 2023
Accepted: 12 December 2023
Published: 15 December 2023
Copyright: © 2023 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
Article
A Vehicle Density Estimation Trafﬁc Light Control System
Using a Two-Dimensional Convolution Neural Network
Malose John Mathiane *, Chunling T u, Pius Adewale
 and Mukatshung Nawej
Department of Computers System Engineering, Faculty of Information and Communication Technology,
Tshwane University of Technology, Soshanguve, Pretoria 0001, South Africa; duc@tut.ac.za (C.T.);
owolawipa@tut.ac.za (P .A.); nawejmc@tut.ac.za (M.N.)
*Correspondence: mjjohn.malose@gmail.com
Abstract: One of the world’s challenges is the amount of trafﬁc on the roads. Waiting for the green
light is a major cause of trafﬁc congestion. Low throughput rates and eventual congestion come
from many trafﬁc signals that are hard coded, irrespective of the volume of the amount of trafﬁc.
Instead of depending on predeﬁned time intervals, it is essential to build a trafﬁc signal control
system that can react to changing vehicle densities. Emergency vehicles, like ambulances, must be
given priority at the intersection so as not to spend more time at the trafﬁc light. Computer vision
techniques can be used to improve road trafﬁc signal control and reduce real-time trafﬁc delays
at intersections without the requirement for substantial infrastructure analysis. Long wait times
and signiﬁcant energy consumption are just two of the problems of the current trafﬁc signal control
system. To optimal efﬁciency, the trafﬁc signal’s duration must be dynamically changed to account for
current trafﬁc volume. To lessen congestion, the approach taken in this research focuses on modifying
trafﬁc signal time determined by the density of vehicles at the crossroads. The main purpose of
this article is to demonstrate heavy trafﬁc and emergency vehicle prioritization from all directions
at the trafﬁc intersection for a speedy passage. Using the Pygame tool, the proposed method in
this study, which includes a mechanism for estimating trafﬁc density and prioritization by counting
vehicles at a trafﬁc junction, is demonstrated. The vehicle throughput for the adaptive trafﬁc light
built using Pygame is compared with the vehicle pass rate for the adaptive trafﬁc light built using
Simulation of Urban Mobility (SUMO). The simulation results show that the adaptive trafﬁc light
built using Pygame achieves 90% throughput compared to the adaptive trafﬁc light built using SUMO.
A Two-Dimensional Convolutional Neural Network (2D-CNN) is implemented using Tensorﬂow
for vehicle classiﬁcation. The 2D-CNN model demonstrated 96% accuracy in classifying vehicles
using the test dataset. Additionally, emergency vehicles, such as ambulances, are given priority for
quick passing.
Keywords: intelligent trafﬁc system; lane priority; object detection; artiﬁcial intelligence; Pygame;
SUMO; 2D-CNN; smart trafﬁc management system
1. Introduction
The regulation of trafﬁc lights plays a crucial role in every smart trafﬁc management
system. The two main factors to be taken into account in trafﬁc light management are the
green light series and the period of green light [ 1]. Trafﬁc congestion in cities is becoming a
bigger problem. People commute longer distances to work, school, and shops, attend social
events, and deal with trafﬁc jams and accidents [ 2]. Fixed signal timer intersection trafﬁc
control systems are the source of many trafﬁc-related problems. They replicate an identical
phase sequence and its length without any modiﬁcations. The ﬁeld of intelligent transport
systems offers novel solutions for trafﬁc control in response to the growing demand for
road capacity [3].
Vehicles 2023 ,5, 1844–1862. https://doi.org/10.3390/vehicles5040099 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/vehiclesVehicles 2023 ,5 1845
The timing merely serves as the default setting for managing what might be referred
to as ordinary trafﬁc [ 4]. Although each road junction has a different trafﬁc light timing
design, there are trafﬁc lights at the intersections that are always on for a predetermined
amount of time [5].
However, many of the current systems use an extremely basic sequence. Currently,
three standard systems of trafﬁc control are in use:
 Manual control: As the name implies, trafﬁc control involves human intervention. To
manage trafﬁc, trafﬁc police are posted in a speciﬁc location;
 Traditional trafﬁc lights with ﬁxed timers: Timers are used to control this. The timer is
set to a constant value. The timer value determines when the lights automatically turn
from red to green [6];
 Electronic sensors: Another state-of-the-art option is to place proximity or loop de-
tectors beside the road. This sensor collects information about trafﬁc in vehicles. The
trafﬁc lights are managed by means of sensor data [7].
These traditional approaches have several shortcomings. It takes a lot of work to
operate the manual regulating mechanism. Handling all the trafﬁc in a city or town by
hand becomes very difﬁcult when resources are scarce. This calls for the need for an
upgraded trafﬁc management system. Static trafﬁc conﬂicts are handled by a trafﬁc signal
with a pre-programmed timer for each phase that does not respond to real trafﬁc on the
route. [ 8]. Accuracy and coverage are typically at odds when using electronic sensors,
such as proximity sensors or loop detectors, and a limited budget will limit the number of
facilities available because high-quality data collection typically requires expensive and
complex hardware. Furthermore, a large number of sensors are usually needed to give
comprehensive coverage throughout a network of facilities due to the restricted effective
range of most sensors [9].
Deep learning-based models have been widely introduced for trafﬁc management
systems in recent years due to their superior object detection accuracy compared to tradi-
tional machine learning algorithms, such as support vector machines and image processing
algorithms [10]. Convolutional activity constitutes one of CNN’s foundations.
There is less need for humans to perform certain tasks thanks to the widespread au-
tomation of processes and goal-achieving capabilities of modern technologies. A computer
can undoubtedly complete tasks faster and more accurately than a human, despite the
fallibility of humans [ 11]. Robots can now learn on their own instead of needing to be
programmed with every possible action and outcome thanks to this technological advance-
ment [ 12] Convolution neural networks, TensorFlow, and Keras were utilized in this study
because they were necessary [13].
The foundation of a convolutional neural network is the perceptron model. As a
result, photos are now classiﬁed differently. A CNN, or ConvNets, is an example of a
deep learning architecture [ 14]. Among many other applications, they work best in facial
recognition and object detection. Self-driving cars have also beneﬁted from them. Due to
their exceptional ability to identify meaningful patterns within images by comprehending
the spatial structure of the relevant input, these networks are helpful for image analysis
and classiﬁcation. CNNs are designed to take advantage of the spatial data, in contrast to
traditional neural networks that ignore spatial structures, such as pixels, that are further
apart or closer together [15]. Figure 1 shows the basic architecture of a CNN.
The fundamental objective of the newly implemented method in this article is to
increase the overall number of cars that can pass through a junction while simultaneously
reducing the amount of time that each track of vehicles must wait for a signal, given the
mathematical function used to compute waiting times. Thanks to this system’s capacity
to instantly adapt to the ﬂow of trafﬁc there, vehicles should be able to drive through the
intersection as quickly as feasible. Since trafﬁc density varies depending on the time of day
(morning, during the day, in the afternoons or evenings), the adaptive intelligence light
system analyses ﬂuctuations in trafﬁc volume. The suggested framework aims to provide
a crossroad signal that can adapt to the movement of trafﬁc. This aims to increase theVehicles 2023 ,5 1846
amount of time between green signals and minimize delays, congestion, and waiting times
by moving trafﬁc through the system considerably more quickly than in a static system.
Additionally, the system detects and modiﬁes the trafﬁc green light timing to allow for a
quicker pass through at junctions, and special duty vehicles, like ambulances, are given
priority at the intersection using the 2D CNN model for vehicle classiﬁcation. This article
includes the following sections. The literature review discusses the contributions of other
experts on the subject, details the components of current trafﬁc management systems, and
is followed by methodology sections that demonstrate the proposed method and model, in
which trafﬁc lights are mentioned as one of the main contemporary sources of congestion,
and the problem is deﬁned in terms of its history and effects. All of the trafﬁc density-
reduction strategies’ simulated models and procedures are discussed. The simulation and
experimental ﬁndings are then analyzed, and the logical parts of trafﬁc systems, such as
the trafﬁc simulation setting technique, are explained. The section compares and analyzes
data gathered from the simulation programs, as well as data visualization. Finally, there
is a conclusion followed by future work, which presents the summary, conclusion taken,
limitations, and contributions to knowledge.
Vehicles 2023 , 5, FOR PEER REVIEW 3 
 
  
Figure 1.  Artiﬁcial intelligence model of a basic perceptron.  
The fundamental objective of the newly implemented method in this article is to in-
crease the overall number of cars that can pass through a junction while simultaneously 
reducing the amount of time that each track of vehicles must wait for a signal, given the 
mathematical function used to compute waiting times. Thanks to this system’s capacity to 
instantly adapt to the ﬂow of tra ﬃc there, vehicles should be able to drive through the 
intersection as quickly as feasible. Since tra ﬃc density varies depending on the time of 
day (morning, during the day, in the afternoons or evenings), the adaptive intelligence 
light system analyses ﬂuctuations in tra ﬃc volume. The suggested framework aims to 
provide a crossroad signal that can adapt to the movement of tra ﬃc. This aims to increase 
the amount of time between green signals an d minimize delays, congestion, and waiting 
times by moving tra ﬃc through the system considerably more quickly than in a static 
system. Additionally, the system detects and modi ﬁes the tra ﬃc green light timing to al-
low for a quicker pass through at junctions, and special duty vehicles, like ambulances, are given priority at the intersection using the 2D CNN model for vehicle classi ﬁcation. 
This article includes the following sections. The literature review discusses the contribu-
tions of other experts on the subject, details the components of current tra ﬃc management 
systems, and is followed by methodology sect ions that demonstrate the proposed method 
and model, in which tra ﬃc lights are mentioned as one of the main contemporary sources 
of congestion, and the problem is de ﬁned in terms of its history and e ﬀects. All of the 
traﬃc density-reduction strategies’ simulated models and procedures are discussed. The 
simulation and experimental ﬁndings are then analyzed, and the logical parts of tra ﬃc 
systems, such as the tra ﬃc simulation se tting technique, are explained. The section com-
pares and analyzes data gathered from the simulation programs, as well as data visuali-zation. Finally, there is a co nclusion followed by future work, which presents the sum-
mary, conclusion taken, limitations , and contributions to knowledge. 
2. Related Work 
When tra ﬃc is heavy, critical response times could be shortened by pu tting the rec-
ommended smart tra ﬃc management system into practice. In the past, manual methods 
were insu ﬃcient to control tra ﬃc as needed. The number of cars on the road today is too 
many for the infrastructure that currently exis ts. In metropolitan areas, this problem af-
fects a larger population. A lot of research has been performed on tra ﬃc management 
employing the intelligent approach of using tra ﬃc data to determine the state of the green 
light. Intelligent tra ﬃc control is a broad topic, and Table 1 lists the methods that have 
been used recently.  
 
 
Figure 1. Artiﬁcial intelligence model of a basic perceptron.
2. Related Work
When trafﬁc is heavy, critical response times could be shortened by putting the rec-
ommended smart trafﬁc management system into practice. In the past, manual methods
were insufﬁcient to control trafﬁc as needed. The number of cars on the road today is
too many for the infrastructure that currently exists. In metropolitan areas, this problem
affects a larger population. A lot of research has been performed on trafﬁc management
employing the intelligent approach of using trafﬁc data to determine the state of the green
light. Intelligent trafﬁc control is a broad topic, and Table 1 lists the methods that have been
used recently.
Table 1. Different intelligent trafﬁc control methodologies.
Reference
NumberMethodology Main Contribution Limitations
[16]A signal timing
optimization model based
on bus priority.The classic approach to a signal timing
optimization problem was combined with the idea
of bus priority. A new methodology that
speciﬁcally considered passenger delay during the
signal timing optimization process was presented
as a solution to this issue.The trafﬁc data collected in a ﬁxed period,
such as peak time, is the only factor considered
by the optimization model when updating the
signal timing scheme. This may not be feasible
for trafﬁc data collected in near real-time.
[17]Intelligent monitoring
technology of trafﬁc ﬂow
based on computer vision.The method uses vehicle identiﬁcation and
localization to provide real-time, accurate, and
robust trafﬁc ﬂow data collection on
road segments.The technique needs to be improved in terms
of processing data collected on the road
segments, and it is limited when it comes to
high-resolution images.Vehicles 2023 ,5 1847
Table 1. Cont.
Reference
NumberMethodology Main Contribution Limitations
[13]An adaptive trafﬁc
congestion control
approach with emergency
vehicle protocol.To allow for minimal trafﬁc congestion, the divider
is adjusted in accordance with the number of
vehicles on the road. When there is trafﬁc
congestion, it is challenging to move when an
ambulance is passing on the road. Using an RFID
reader and an RFID tag, this concept avoids
this issue.The system counts the number of cars and
recognizes an ambulance using image
processing techniques. Machine learning
algorithms may be used in the future to
monitor different kinds of emergency vehicles,
such as police cars and ﬁre trucks, and to
increase the accuracy of vehicle identiﬁcation.
[18]An IOT-based trafﬁc
controlling system.A suggested technique for priority-based vehicle
identiﬁcation makes use of techniques from the
picture processing industry. If an emergency
vehicle is identiﬁed, that lane will take precedence
over all other lanes.The vehicle count mechanism that would
prioritize other lanes with heavier trafﬁc in
addition to emergency vehicles is absent from
the proposed system.
[10]Emergency vehicle type
classiﬁcation using a
convolutional neural
network.The pre-trained model in this work, VGG-16, had a
smaller convolutional layer and ﬁlter size. The
experiment yielded a 95% accuracy rate for the
suggested method.The module may have learned from the color
of the feature and needs some tweaks because
it recognizes a typical red car as a ﬁretruck and
a white car as a police car.
A bidirectional vehicle
platooning-based intelligent
transportation system.This work proposes an intelligent transportation
system that can monitor nearby vehicles and
signals to monitor other vehicles to prevent
accidents and shorten wait times at busy
intersections by giving drivers access to
pertinent data.The proposed methodology does not have
intelligence in controlling the trafﬁc lights, and
no emergency vehicles are given priority at
the intersection.
An intelligent vehicular trafﬁc management and control system is suggested in this re-
search [ 19]. Using an algorithm based on several criteria and determining the optimal routes
where there is the least amount of congestion, the suggested strategy seeks to decrease
the problem of trafﬁc congestion and make trafﬁc signals function effectively, eliminating
trafﬁc jams. Other forms of communication technology, such as cellular networks and
Geographic Positioning Systems (GPS), must be integrated with the proposed system [ 19].
The junction control issue in smart cities with smart transportation systems was examined
in this work [ 20]. In contrast to current designs, the suggested method divides the parked
cars in a lane into various groups. Through V2I communications, the okay to pass an
intersection is then sent in terms of vehicle groupings [ 20]. Finding the right groupings
based on current trafﬁc circumstances presents the greatest challenge. The approach for the
online collection of vehicle status on a road in an urban setting employing clustering in
vehicular ad hoc networks is provided in this research [ 21]. To automatically schedule the
trafﬁc within its ﬁeld of vision without contacting other intersections or a central control
system, the information acquired is sent to the trafﬁc light at the intersection [ 19]. Results
obtained reveal that the suggested strategy signiﬁcantly reduces the average global delay
and increases the frequency of non-stopped vehicle movements.
A ﬂexible trafﬁc signal-regulated method was suggested for this study [ 4] to decrease
the average time spent waiting at an intersection and increase trafﬁc throughput. In contrast
to a ﬁxed-time control algorithm and an actuated control approach, the experimental results
demonstrated that the proposed formula might result in higher throughput and shorter
vehicle waiting times. The suggested system [ 20] ensures that by adapting the green signal
timing according to the volume of trafﬁc at the light, the direction with more trafﬁc obtains
a green signal for a longer amount of time than the way with less trafﬁc. As a result, there
were fewer unwelcome delays, less trafﬁc, and less waiting time, all of which would result
in less fuel use and pollution. A trafﬁc light scheduling algorithm (ITLC) for isolated
scenarios is presented in this paper [ 22]. Additionally, for open-network settings, an ATL
regulating algorithm was created. Vehicle ad hoc communications technology is used by
the ITLC algorithm to collect real-time trafﬁc information on all competing trafﬁc patterns
at every intersection with a signal [ 20]. Future studies will look at these trafﬁc signalVehicles 2023 ,5 1848
scheduling algorithms’ fault tolerance, dependability, and partial relationship with vehicle
problems [23].
The topic of this study [ 24] is the application of edge computing and Internet of Things
sensors to an optimal control method for emergency vehicle priority. Throughout this
construction, emergency vehicles will always take precedence, causing no disruption to
normal trafﬁc. The real-world trial with the Edge server and Dashboard Unit (DBU) is
complete. There is a need for an improvement in the waiting for vehicles. In this study [ 25],
a suggestion for allocating emergency vehicles to trafﬁc has been offered. The system
combines vehicle counting, timely warning transmission through the sensor network, and
visual sensing methods to gauge the separation between intersections and the emergency
vehicle. The range measurement in adverse weather and busy trafﬁc conditions needs more
study. The main objective of this paper’s [ 26] design is to minimize the amount of time that
EVs must wait at the crossing and to stop accidents there, which can lower the number
of fatalities and the damage of priceless property. No driver interaction is necessary in
this instance for the system to deliver requests from SRM to the RSU. Thanks to DSRC’s
dependable communication, transmission and reception happen signiﬁcantly faster than
they would have using the GSM technique [ 15]. A dynamic web or mobile application
interface that permits more intelligent automatic and manual control of the system may be
developed to enhance it [14].
In this study [ 27], a basic CNN model was put up and meticulously trained utilizing
data augmentation techniques. The model’s performance in measuring trafﬁc density
was excellent. However, training the CNN for a new site takes a signiﬁcant amount of
computational power and human labor. In the current work, a unique method for accurately
quantifying trafﬁc density at the aggregate level for trafﬁc control and management was
demonstrated by the counting of vehicles on a road section. The strategy was successful in
accurately counting the number of vehicles.
The methodology provided in this research includes the calculation of density and
prioritization of intersections with signiﬁcant trafﬁc. In addition, emergency vehicles are
prioritized using a 2D-CNN for vehicle categorization. The proposed method is compared
to one of the VANET methodologies to illustrate its performance and correctness.
3. Proposed Methodology and Model
The method of determining trafﬁc density at a trafﬁc intersection by counting cars and
modifying trafﬁc signal timing in response to vehicle density is illustrated using the Pygame
tool. The goal of this approach is to manage the trafﬁc by prioritizing lanes with more
vehicles. Ambulances are given priority for quick passing at crossings when approaching
the trafﬁc intersection after they are identiﬁed using the 2D-CNN vehicle categorization.
This study’s development takes the following factors into account:
 Emergency vehicles enter the intersection from both directions at the same time. In
this case, the suggested system is designed in such a way that it prioritizes lanes with
heavy trafﬁc, and there is no emergency vehicle preemption, which is accomplished
through the program;
 Intersection accidents. The proposed system lacks an accident detection method and
instead focuses on vehicle density and emergency vehicle preemption. It was designed
with the assumption that no accidents would ever occur at the intersection and that
trafﬁc would ﬂow freely.
The methodology section is divided into two major sections: trafﬁc density estimation
and emergency vehicle preemption using the 2D-CNN. The simulation’s main method
is trafﬁc density estimation and prioritization, and vehicles are counted as they pass,
approach, and pass the intersection. Figure 2 shows the proposed system model.Vehicles 2023 ,5 1849
Vehicles 2023 , 5, FOR PEER REVIEW 7 
 
  
Figure 2.  The proposed system model. 
As shown in Figure 3, the emergency vehicle preemption program acts to interrupt 
the main program, and when an emergency vehicle is detected approaching the intersec-
tion using the 2D-CNN, the tra ﬃc light changes to green for a faster passage. 
 
Figure 3.  Vehicle count and tra ﬃc volume at an intersection.  
Figure 2. The proposed system model.
As shown in Figure 3, the emergency vehicle preemption program acts to interrupt the
main program, and when an emergency vehicle is detected approaching the intersection
using the 2D-CNN, the trafﬁc light changes to green for a faster passage.
Vehicles 2023 , 5, FOR PEER REVIEW 7 
 
  
Figure 2.  The proposed system model. 
As shown in Figure 3, the emergency vehicle preemption program acts to interrupt 
the main program, and when an emergency vehicle is detected approaching the intersec-
tion using the 2D-CNN, the tra ﬃc light changes to green for a faster passage. 
 
Figure 3.  Vehicle count and tra ﬃc volume at an intersection.  
Figure 3. Vehicle count and trafﬁc volume at an intersection.Vehicles 2023 ,5 1850
3.1. Trafﬁc Density Estimation and Prioritization
The created system employs vehicle detection to determine the current trafﬁc load
using data generated from trafﬁc junction simulation in Pygame. Each class of vehicle,
including cars, buses, trucks, and ambulances, has a number that is counted to determine
the trafﬁc load. The green signal timer is conﬁgured by the signal-switching algorithm
using this load and a few other variables [28]. Additionally, emergency vehicles are given
priority at the intersection using the 2D-CNN for vehicle classiﬁcation. To show how well
the system works and to contrast it with an existing adaptive trafﬁc system built with
SUMO, a simulation is produced.
A signal-switching algorithm modiﬁes the red signal timers of other lights and cor-
rectly sets the green signal timer based on the trafﬁc density data provided by the vehicle
detecting module. Additionally, depending on timings, it alternates between the signals.
The algorithm receives data about the autos that the detection module has identiﬁed. The
total number of cars is then determined using this data. The detection model validates
the output (0,1,2,3) of the 2D-CNN using images taken from Pygame via the webcam
launched by the tool for the purpose of emergency vehicle preemption. Once the green
signal time has been established and allotted, the red signal times of the additional signals
are modiﬁed as needed. Any number of signals at a junction can be added or lowered using
this technique. Following the trafﬁc intensity assessment algorithm’s processing time, the
duration of the green light is taken into consideration. The number of lanes and the overall
count of automobiles in every classiﬁcation, such as cars, ambulances, and trucks, are used
to compute trafﬁc density (TD), as indicated in Equation (1):
Traffic Density (TD) =åAutomobileGroup (NoOfAutomobileAutomobileGroup)
(NoOfTrafficLanes +1)(1)
where:
 TD is the trafﬁc density calculated using the simulation’s current load of vehicles;
 The vehicle detection module determines the length of the string NoOfAutomobile-
Group, which encodes the number of cars from each class present at the signal;
 The intersection’s lane count is given by the parameter NoOfTrafﬁcLanes.
The method sets the default time for the ﬁrst signal of the ﬁrst cycle when it is ﬁrst
run, and it uses trafﬁc density (TD) to determine the timings of all subsequent signals as
well as all other signals in the ﬁrst cycle. The countdown to the red light of the next green
signal is approaching ﬁve seconds, or the timer for the green signal is approaching ﬁve
seconds. Detecting vehicles traveling in both directions is the responsibility of a second
thread, while the main thread controls the timing of the current signal. Once the outcome
has been processed, the next green signal timer is programmed. The adjusted trafﬁc light
timer shown in Figure 3 makes it possible for vehicles to move through the intersection
faster when they are seen approaching.
3.2. Emergency Vehicle Preemption Using a 2D-CNN
Ambulances are given the ability to control trafﬁc lights at crossings thanks to a
practice called emergency vehicle preemption. This vehicle is supposed to cross and have
priority at the intersections fast and securely, even though other vehicles are still subject to
a red trafﬁc light. Pygame is used to demonstrate the operation of the trafﬁc light’s signal
switching and emergency vehicle preemption system in the ﬂowchart in Figure 4:
The procedure starts when an emergency vehicle approaches the trafﬁc light. When
an emergency vehicle is detected using the detection model and the 2D-CNN for vehicle
classiﬁcation, the computer extends the green light to allow it to safely cross the intersection.
According to Table 2, every vehicle has a “type” allocated to it with the program (0—car,
1—bus, 2—truck, 3—ambulance).Vehicles 2023 ,5 1851
Vehicles 2023 , 5, FOR PEER REVIEW 9 
 
  
Figure 4.  Diagram for emergency vehicle preemption and Pygame-based tra ﬃc light signal switch-
ing. 
The procedure starts when an emergency vehicle approaches the tra ﬃc light. When 
an emergency vehicle is detected using the detection model and the 2D-CNN for vehicle classi ﬁcation, the computer extends the green light to allow it to safely cross the intersec-
tion. According to Table 2, every vehicle has a “type” allocated to it with the program (0—
car, 1—bus, 2—truck, 3—ambulance). 
Table 2.  The Pygame simulation engine’s categorization of vehicles . 
Vehicle Type Vehicle Groups Average Speed 
0 car 2.25 m/s 
1 bus 1.8 m/s 
2 truck 1.8 m/s 
3 ambulance 2.5 m/s 
Based on the output of the 2D-CNN model displayed in Figure 5, the computer can 
recognize emergency vehicles using the vehicle type that has been provided to it (3-am-
bulance) and adjust the tra ﬃc signal as necessary. The sy stem enters the “Green Light 
Extended” state when the green light has b een prolonged, as seen in Figure 4. 
Figure 4. Diagram for emergency vehicle preemption and Pygame-based trafﬁc light signal switching.
Table 2. The Pygame simulation engine’s categorization of vehicles.
Vehicle Type Vehicle Groups Average Speed
0 car 2.25 m/s
1 bus 1.8 m/s
2 truck 1.8 m/s
3 ambulance 2.5 m/s
Based on the output of the 2D-CNN model displayed in Figure 5, the computer
can recognize emergency vehicles using the vehicle type that has been provided to it
(3-ambulance ) and adjust the trafﬁc signal as necessary. The system enters the “Green Light
Extended” state when the green light has been prolonged, as seen in Figure 4.
The collection of photos of various vehicles, including cars, trucks, buses, and am-
bulances, is divided into training datasets and test datasets. To ensure uniformity, every
image is scaled to a ﬁxed size and changed to grayscale for simpler processing. As shown
in Figure 5, the CNN model is fed different image labels as input (e.g., car label 0, bus
label 1, truck label 2, and ambulance label 3), and it is then trained to learn over time using
Keras and OpenCV as part of the supervised learning technique The model was trained
using 100 images with 100 epochs, and the detection algorithm built using Pygame uses
the output of either 0, 1, 2, or 3 from the model after it has been compiled to control the
trafﬁc logic and extend the time of the trafﬁc green light. Figure 5 displays the CNN for
picture categorization.Vehicles 2023 ,5 1852
Vehicles 2023 , 5, FOR PEER REVIEW 10 
 
  
Figure 5.  Categorization of vehicles using a 2D-CNN.  
The collection of photos of various vehicl es, including cars, trucks, buses, and ambu-
lances, is divided into training datasets and test datasets. To ensure uniformity, every im-
age is scaled to a ﬁxed size and changed to grayscale for simpler processing. As shown in 
Figure 5, the CNN model is fed di ﬀerent image labels as input (e.g., car label 0, bus label 
1, truck label 2, and ambulance label 3), and it is then trained to learn over time using 
Keras and OpenCV as part of the supervised  learning technique The model was trained 
using 100 images with 100 epochs, and the de tection algorithm built using Pygame uses 
the output of either 0, 1, 2, or 3 from the model after it has been compiled to control the 
traﬃc logic and extend the time of the tra ﬃc green light. Figure 5 displays the CNN for 
picture categorization. 
Images are captured from Pygame with the ﬁxed size and saved as “.png”; then, the 
images captured from Pygame are used to test the 2D-CNN model for real-time classi ﬁ-
cation. The program uses the output from th e trained CNN model (0,1,2, and 3) as a con-
dition to either externalize the greenlight if the output is (3 —ambulance) for emergency 
vehicle preemption or change it to red if th e output is (0—car, 1—bus, and 2—truck). Be-
low is the algorithm used for vehicle classi ﬁcation using the CNN and Keras: 
• Import various python libraries (TensorFlow, Numpy, cv2); 
• Make a folder containing the labels for the training and testing datasets; 
• Divide the features and labels into sets for testing, validation, and training; 
• Prepare the images by applying e ﬀects such as grayscale conversion, image augmen-
tation, and dataset normalization; 
• Make an image generator so that there are enough images available for use; 
• A convolution and a max pooling layer should  be added, along with several hidden 
layers. Depending on the number of features required, ﬂatten and dropout; 
• For process optimization, use the ReLU activation function and Adam optimizer; 
• The accuracy score of the evaluation metric should be used to assess the neural net-
work’s performance; 
Figure 5. Categorization of vehicles using a 2D-CNN.
Images are captured from Pygame with the ﬁxed size and saved as “.png”; then, the
images captured from Pygame are used to test the 2D-CNN model for real-time classiﬁca-
tion. The program uses the output from the trained CNN model (0,1,2, and 3) as a condition
to either externalize the greenlight if the output is (3—ambulance) for emergency vehicle
preemption or change it to red if the output is (0—car, 1—bus, and 2—truck). Below is the
algorithm used for vehicle classiﬁcation using the CNN and Keras:
 Import various python libraries (TensorFlow, Numpy, cv2);
 Make a folder containing the labels for the training and testing datasets;
 Divide the features and labels into sets for testing, validation, and training;
 Prepare the images by applying effects such as grayscale conversion, image augmenta-
tion, and dataset normalization;
 Make an image generator so that there are enough images available for use;
 A convolution and a max pooling layer should be added, along with several hidden
layers. Depending on the number of features required, ﬂatten and dropout;
 For process optimization, use the ReLU activation function and Adam optimizer;
 The accuracy score of the evaluation metric should be used to assess the neural
network’s performance;
 The accuracy score will indicate how well the CNN model operates on the test dataset.
In Figure 6, the ﬂow conversation used to train the 2D-CNN model is displayed.
The evaluation score can be derived using Equation (2) [29].
Score =TP
TP+FP+FN(2)
where:
 True positive is denoted by TP and false positive is represented by FP;
 The number of vehicles that were accurately detected is indicated by false nega-
tive (FN);
The ReLU is utilized for activation. Assuming x as the input to the neurons, the activa-
tion function in deep neural networks calculates the output, as depicted in Equation (3).
f(x)=y=max (0,x) (3)Vehicles 2023 ,5 1853
Vehicles 2023 , 5, FOR PEER REVIEW 11 
 
 • The accuracy score will indicate how well  the CNN model operates on the test da-
taset. 
In Figure 6, the ﬂow conversation used to train the 2D-CNN model is displayed. 
 
Figure 6.  A 2D-CNN model’s training ﬂowchart.  
The evaluation score can be de rived using Equation (2) [29]. 
Score =TP
TP + FP + FN (2)
where: 
• True positive is denoted by TP and false positive is represented by FP; 
• The number of vehicles that were accurately  detected is indicate d by false negative 
(FN); 
The ReLU is utilized for activation. Assuming x as the input to the neurons, the acti-
vation function in deep neural networks calcul ates the output, as depi cted in Equation (3). 
𝑓(𝑥)  =  𝑦 =  max (0, 𝑥)  (3)
A 2D-CNN model minimizes the mean absolute error (MAE) to forecast tra ﬃc be-
tween the estimated value 𝑦ො௡ and the actual value 𝑦௡. The loss function can be obtained 
using the formula given in Equation (4). 
Figure 6. A 2D-CNN model’s training ﬂowchart.
A 2D-CNN model minimizes the mean absolute error (MAE) to forecast trafﬁc between
the estimated value ˆynand the actual value yn. The loss function can be obtained using the
formula given in Equation (4).
MAE =1
NåN
n=1jyn ˆynj (4)
A preemption timer is initiated as the green light is extended to track how long it
remains on. The system switches back to its standard green light cycle after the preemption
period is up, allowing other directions to pass through the intersection. After the ordinary
trafﬁc light cycle, the system resumes regular functioning until the next emergency vehicle
is detected. Throughout this whole process, the primary thread is monitoring how long the
current green signal will last. The algorithm determines the next signal, which turns green
for the predetermined period when the green timer on the current signal hits zero. Based
on the percentage of each class of vehicles that were present at a signal and considering the
typical beginning speeds, ambulance detection, and acceleration times of cars, the right
green signal time was chosen. The following step is to use Equation (5) to calculate the time
until the trafﬁc light turns green.
TGST =åAutomobileGroup (NoOfAuotmobileAuotmobileGroupAverageTmeAutomobileGroup)
(NoOfTrafficLanes +1)(5)Vehicles 2023 ,5 1854
The average time it takes each vehicle class to cross a junction is estimated, where:
 TGST is the trafﬁc signal time for the green light;
 The string number of automobile group encodes, as decided by the vehicle detection
module, the quantity of each kind of vehicle at the signal;
 Average time measures the typical amount of time that it takes a vehicle in that group
to cross an intersection;
 The intersection’s lane conﬁguration is the number of lanes.
The typical amount of time needed for each kind of vehicle to cross a junction varies
depending on intersection characteristics and vehicle types, like emergency vehicles. The
signals are repeatedly swapped between the lanes with the highest and lowest densities.
The yellow signals have been taken into consideration, as well as the present signal con-
ﬁguration. The signals are shown in the following order: red, green, yellow, and then red.
Figure 7 below demonstrate the algorithm of the program.
Vehicles 2023 , 5, FOR PEER REVIEW 12 
 
 𝑀𝐴𝐸 =ଵ
ே∑ |ே
௡ୀଵ 𝑦௡−𝑦ො௡|  (4)
A preemption timer is initiated as the green light is extended to track how long it 
remains on. The system switches back to it s standard green light cycle after the preemp-
tion period is up, allowing other directions to pass through the intersection. After the or-
dinary tra ﬃc light cycle, the system resumes regular functioning until the next emergency 
vehicle is detected. Throughout this whole pr ocess, the primary thre ad is monitoring how 
long the current green signal will last. The algorithm determines the next signal, which 
turns green for the predetermined period when the green timer on the current signal hits 
zero. Based on the percentage of each class of vehicles that were present at a signal and 
considering the typical beginning speeds, ambu lance detection, and acceleration times of 
cars, the right green signal time was chosen. Th e following step is to use Equation (5) to 
calculate the time until the tra ﬃc light turns green. 
TGST =  ∑୅୳୲୭୫୭ୠ୧୪ୣୋ୰୭୳୮ (୒୭୓୤୅୳୭୲୫୭ୠ୧୪ୣ ఽ౫౥౪ౣ౥ౘ౟ౢ౛ృ౨౥౫౦ ∗୅୴ୣ୰ୟ୥ୣ୘୫ୣ ఽ౫౪౥ౣ౥ౘ౟ౢ౛ృ౨౥౫౦ ) 
(୒୭୓୤୘୰ୟ୤ϐ୧ୡ୐ୟ୬ୣୱ ା ଵ)  (5)
The average time it takes each vehicle class to cross a junction is estimated, 
where: • TGST is the tra ﬃc signal time for the green light; 
• The string number of automobile group enco des, as decided by the vehicle detection 
module, the quantity of each kind of vehicle at the signal; 
• Average time measures the typical amount of time that it takes a vehicle in that group 
to cross an intersection; 
• The intersection’s lane con ﬁguration is the number of lanes. 
The typical amount of time needed for each kind of vehicle to cross a junction varies 
depending on intersection characteristics and vehicle types, like emergency vehicles. The 
signals are repeatedly swapped between the la nes with the highest and lowest densities. 
The yellow signals have been taken into consideration, as well as the present signal con-ﬁguration. The signals are shown in the following order: red, green, yellow, and then red. 
Figure 7 below demonstrate the algorithm of the program. 
 
Figure 7.  Algorithm of the simulated program. 
Figure 7. Algorithm of the simulated program.
After the simulation, the following equation can be used to calculate the vehicle time
waiting ( VTw) and vehicle time lost ( VTL). The time delay (T D) is the length of time that a
trafﬁc signal was green and no vehicles—including cars, lorries, buses, and ambulances—
passed through a junction. Equation (6) can be used to calculate the average lost time TL
for each type of vehicle at the intersection, including cars, trucks, buses, and ambulances.
VTL=TD
N(6)
where:
 Total delay (T D) is the total of all car delays over a certain period measured in seconds;
 Total number of vehicles (N) is the entire count of automobiles that traversed the
junction or segment of road during the same duration.
Vehicle queue length (VQ L) refers to the period that cars, trucks, buses, and ambu-
lances take at the crossroad while awaiting the green light. The typical wait time VTwisVehicles 2023 ,5 1855
derived by dividing the vehicles queue length as stated in Equation (7) by the ﬂow rate of
the cars, trucks, buses, and ambulances minus the departure rate.
VTw=VQ L
N(7)
where:
 Vehicle queue length (VQ L)is the number of cars in the line at any moment;
 N is the total number of vehicles in the entire simulation.
Every car logs its location, speed, amount of waiting time, and starting time. The
simulation loop updates all vehicles, renders the current state, veriﬁes simulation end
conditions, and extends simulation time. It computes and adds the lost time and queue
length for each vehicle when it arrives at a destination or meets certain criteria. The
average lost time and average queue length are determined by dividing the total lost time
and total queue length by the total number of vehicles that have completed their journey.
The pseudo-code for calculating average lost time and vehicle queue length within the
simulated program is shown by Algorithm 1 below.
Algorithm 1 Vehicle delay
Total vehicles = 0
Total loss time = 0
Total queue length = 0
class Automobile: location
waiting_time, speed, and waiting_start_time
function update():
If position = waiting_location, then
waiting_start_time = current_time if waiting_start_time is null.
otherwise:
if waiting_start_time is not null:
wait
vehicle movement based on speed
start up the cars
Set up the simulation’s parameters.
As the simulation is running, for every vehicle in the vehicles:
vehicle.update()
display the state of the simulation
the check_simulation_end_condition function
If some vehicle has ﬁnished, then:
total vehicles += 1
total lost time += calculate
lost time for completed vehicle()
total queue length += calculate queue length for completed vehicle()
advance time for simulation
Total lost time/total vehicles equals average lost time.
Total queue length/total vehicles equals average queue length.
Vehicle count and lane priority trafﬁc are regulated using a trafﬁc light control system
signal and gauge density and give priority to lanes with more vehicles by detecting and
counting the vehicles as they pass through the intersection. In Pygame, vehicles are
generated randomly at predetermined intervals of time.
4. Simulation, Experimental Data, and Results Analyses
Trafﬁc simulation’s constituent parts are their infrastructure and the trafﬁc that uses
it. While trafﬁc is made up of vehicles, such as trucks, buses, pedestrians, bicycles, pas-
senger cars, trains, and trams, infrastructure components include streets, trafﬁc signals,
railroad lines, induction loop detectors, etc. Many metrics, including queue length, sys-Vehicles 2023 ,5 1856
tem throughput, travel time, delay, etc., are commonly used to assess the effectiveness of
trafﬁc systems.
4.1. Simulation Tools
All the simulations are executed using the Anaconda Navigator tool called Spyder. To
thoroughly compare the outcomes of the two systems, ten simulations of both adaptive
systems, each lasting ﬁve minutes, were run side by side, as shown in Figure 8.
Vehicles 2023 , 5, FOR PEER REVIEW 14 
 
 total queue length += calculate queue length for completed vehicle() 
advance time for simulation Total lost time/total vehicles equals average lost time. Total queue length/total vehicles  equals average queue length. 
Vehicle count and lane priority tra ﬃc are regulated using a tra ﬃc light control system 
signal and gauge density and give priority to  lanes with more vehicles by detecting and 
counting the vehicles as they pass through the intersection. In Pygame, vehicles are gen-
erated randomly at predetermined intervals of time. 
4. Simulation, Experimental Data, and Results Analyses 
Traﬃc simulation’s constituent parts ar e their infrastructure and the tra ﬃc that uses 
it. While tra ﬃc is made up of vehicles, such as tr ucks, buses, pedestr ians, bicycles, pas-
senger cars, trains, and trams, infrastr ucture components include streets, tra ﬃc signals, 
railroad lines, induction loop detectors, etc. Many metrics, including queue length, system 
throughput, travel time, delay, etc., are commonly used to assess the e ﬀectiveness of tra ﬃc 
systems. 
4.1. Simulation Tools 
All the simulations are executed using the Anaconda Navigator tool called Spyder. 
To thoroughly compare the outcomes of the tw o systems, ten simulations of both adaptive 
systems, each lasting ﬁve minutes, were run side by side, as shown in Figure 8.  
 
Figure 8.  SUMO and Pygame simulation platforms.  
A simulation of actual tra ﬃc was created using Pygame. It  facilitates system visuali-
zation and comparison with an existing static system. Pygame is a collection of cross-plat-form Python utilities for game development.  Pygame is incredibly portable, running on 
nearly every platform and operating system. It has an LGPL license and is free to use [30]. 
The traﬃc simulation of the proposed model usin g Pygame was simulated on the Ubuntu 
platform. The suggested method aims to utiliz e the resources for time allocation and traf-
ﬁc management as e ﬀectively as possible. No ma tter how many vehicles are present, every 
vehicle must pass over the crossing [30]. Consequently, navigating through tra ﬃc will 
always require the least amount of time. In  SUMO, vehicles are randomly generated and 
loaded into the network at a random speed. In  order to dramatically reduce individual 
Figure 8. SUMO and Pygame simulation platforms.
A simulation of actual trafﬁc was created using Pygame. It facilitates system visualiza-
tion and comparison with an existing static system. Pygame is a collection of cross-platform
Python utilities for game development. Pygame is incredibly portable, running on nearly
every platform and operating system. It has an LGPL license and is free to use [ 30]. The
trafﬁc simulation of the proposed model using Pygame was simulated on the Ubuntu
platform. The suggested method aims to utilize the resources for time allocation and trafﬁc
management as effectively as possible. No matter how many vehicles are present, every
vehicle must pass over the crossing [ 30]. Consequently, navigating through trafﬁc will
always require the least amount of time. In SUMO, vehicles are randomly generated and
loaded into the network at a random speed. In order to dramatically reduce individual
waiting times, the method seeks to schedule cars at a junction by calculating the number of
vehicles on each road and spreading this trafﬁc using a variety of criteria [ 30]. Vehicle data
for departure, duration, etc., are recorded in the output.xml ﬁle during simulation.
4.2. Experimental Data
The vehicle test images from the Pygame simulation were used to train the model,
and it achieved a 96% accuracy rate in predicting the type of vehicle. Table 3 below shows
all the parameters used by the 2D-CNN during training to achieve a high accuracy rate.Vehicles 2023 ,5 1857
Table 3. Architecture details of the 2D Convolutional Neural Network.
Number Architecture Details
1 Input image size (640, 480)
2Total number of layers: 2
Total MaxPooling2D layers used: 2
Total fully connected layers used: 3
Activation layers: 4
Dropout layer: 2
3 Kernal size at each Conv2D layer: 3 3
4 Pool size at each maxPooling2D layer: (2,2)
5 Output class labels: 3
Table 4 shows the output of the 2D-CNN module during training for vehicle classiﬁca-
tion, accuracy, and time loss.
Table 4. The 2D-CCN accuracy and loss with epoch.
Epoch Time Taken(s) Accuracy Loss
1 11 0.478 1.998
2 9 0.800 0.678
3 10 0.877 0.423
4 11 0.906 0.312
5 11 0.921 0.273
6 10 0.923 0.255
7 11 0.935 0.232
8 12 0.936 0.228
9 11 0.938 0.233
10 9 0.939 0.214
11 11 0.944 0.211
12 11 0.947 0.206
13 9 0.945 0.216
14 11 0.951 0.201
15 10 0.953 0.186
The accuracy and time loss during the training of the labeled dataset is shown in
Figure 9.
Vehicles 2023 , 5, FOR PEER REVIEW 16 
 
  
Figure 9.  Comparison of the time loss and accuracy for the trained dataset . 
4.3. Simulation Results and Analysis 
The suggested adaptive tra ﬃc light control system built with Pygame and the adap-
tive traﬃc signal system built with SUMO were both evaluated in a real-time se tting with 
the same amount of time (300 s). In this research, average vehicle throughput was com-pared with a system built using SUMO. Ten si mulations of both adaptive systems, each 
lasting 5 min, were run side by side to comprehensively compare the results of the two 
systems. A performance indicator was the number  of cars that could cross the intersection 
in a certain period. This has an impact on both the length of other signal waits, as well as 
vehicle wait times. Multiple vehicles passing in opposite directions and the total number of passing vehicles were used to tabulate the data.  
(a) Simulation using SUMO. 
Figure 10 shows random vehicles generated using SUMO after 300 s for lane priority 
using the adaptive tra ﬃc light control module.  
 
Figure 10.  Simulation of an adaptive tra ﬃc intersection using SUMO.  
After 300 s, the printed output shows both the total number of vehicles loaded in the 
simulation passing through the junction and the vehicle speeds for each vehicle class. 
Since tra ﬃc density varies depending on  the time of day (morning, during the day, in the 
afternoons or evenings), the data above for an adaptive tra ﬃc signal can re ﬂect a 00.511.522.5
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15
Accuracy Loss
Figure 9. Comparison of the time loss and accuracy for the trained dataset.Vehicles 2023 ,5 1858
4.3. Simulation Results and Analysis
The suggested adaptive trafﬁc light control system built with Pygame and the adaptive
trafﬁc signal system built with SUMO were both evaluated in a real-time setting with the
same amount of time (300 s). In this research, average vehicle throughput was compared
with a system built using SUMO. Ten simulations of both adaptive systems, each lasting
5 min, were run side by side to comprehensively compare the results of the two systems. A
performance indicator was the number of cars that could cross the intersection in a certain
period. This has an impact on both the length of other signal waits, as well as vehicle wait
times. Multiple vehicles passing in opposite directions and the total number of passing
vehicles were used to tabulate the data.
(a) Simulation using SUMO
Figure 10 shows random vehicles generated using SUMO after 300 s for lane priority
using the adaptive trafﬁc light control module.
Vehicles 2023 , 5, FOR PEER REVIEW 16 
 
  
Figure 9.  Comparison of the time loss and accuracy for the trained dataset . 
4.3. Simulation Results and Analysis 
The suggested adaptive tra ﬃc light control system built with Pygame and the adap-
tive traﬃc signal system built with SUMO were both evaluated in a real-time se tting with 
the same amount of time (300 s). In this research, average vehicle throughput was com-pared with a system built using SUMO. Ten si mulations of both adaptive systems, each 
lasting 5 min, were run side by side to comprehensively compare the results of the two 
systems. A performance indicator was the number  of cars that could cross the intersection 
in a certain period. This has an impact on both the length of other signal waits, as well as 
vehicle wait times. Multiple vehicles passing in opposite directions and the total number of passing vehicles were used to tabulate the data.  
(a) Simulation using SUMO. 
Figure 10 shows random vehicles generated using SUMO after 300 s for lane priority 
using the adaptive tra ﬃc light control module.  
 
Figure 10.  Simulation of an adaptive tra ﬃc intersection using SUMO.  
After 300 s, the printed output shows both the total number of vehicles loaded in the 
simulation passing through the junction and the vehicle speeds for each vehicle class. 
Since tra ﬃc density varies depending on  the time of day (morning, during the day, in the 
afternoons or evenings), the data above for an adaptive tra ﬃc signal can re ﬂect a 00.511.522.5
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15
Accuracy Loss
Figure 10. Simulation of an adaptive trafﬁc intersection using SUMO.
After 300 s, the printed output shows both the total number of vehicles loaded in
the simulation passing through the junction and the vehicle speeds for each vehicle class.
Since trafﬁc density varies depending on the time of day (morning, during the day, in the
afternoons or evenings), the data above for an adaptive trafﬁc signal can reﬂect a simulation
of real-world trafﬁc. Another example of how an adaptive trafﬁc signal might increase
vehicle throughput at a trafﬁc intersection and save both drivers’ and passengers’ time is
shown in Table 5.
Table 5. Results for the adaptive trafﬁc light using SUMO.
Number Direction 1 Direction 2 Direction 3 Direction 4 Total
1 48 46 43 57 194
2 43 43 51 45 182
3 44 51 45 50 190
4 52 50 55 37 194
5 43 47 51 44 185
6 50 54 38 50 192
7 54 61 38 35 188
8 42 48 55 51 196
9 48 41 51 43 183
10 53 49 43 41 186Vehicles 2023 ,5 1859
(b) Simulation using Pygame
Various test simulations were used to test a vehicle detection module, including ones
where the number of randomly generated vehicles passing the intersection varied. The
algorithm can detect and count vehicles crossing the intersection. Both simulations were
run, and the total number of vehicles going through the intersection in all directions, as
well as the number of vehicles traveling in each direction, were counted. Figure 11 shows a
lane priority adaptive trafﬁc light that was captured after 300 s.
Vehicles 2023 , 5, FOR PEER REVIEW 17 
 
 simulation of real-world tra ﬃc. Another example of how an adaptive tra ﬃc signal might 
increase vehicle throughput at a tra ﬃc intersection and save both drivers’ and passengers’ 
time is shown in Table 5. 
Table 5.  Results for the adaptive tra ﬃc light using SUMO.  
Numbe r Direction 1 Direction 2 Direction 3 Direction 4 Total 
1 48 46 43 57 194 
2 43 43  51 45 182 
3 44 51  45 50 190 
4 52 50  55 37 194 
5 43 47  51 44 185 
6 50 54  38 50 192 
7 54 61  38 35 188 
8 42 48  55 51 196 
9 48 41  51 43 183 
10 53 49  43 41 186 
(b) Simulation using Pygame. 
Various test simulations were used to test  a vehicle detection module, including ones 
where the number of randomly generated vehi cles passing the intersection varied. The 
algorithm can detect and count vehicles crossing the intersection. Both simulations were 
run, and the total number of vehicles going through the intersection in all directions, as well as the number of vehicles traveling in each direction, were counted. Figure 11 shows 
a lane priority adaptive tra ﬃc light that was captured after 300 s.  
 
Figure 11.  The simulation of the suggested system.  
The printed output after 300 s displays the overall number of vehicles going through 
the junction, as well as the number of vehicl es traveling through the junction in each di-
rection, as shown in Figure 12.  
Figure 11. The simulation of the suggested system.
The printed output after 300 s displays the overall number of vehicles going through
the junction, as well as the number of vehicles traveling through the junction in each
direction, as shown in Figure 12.
Vehicles 2023 , 5, FOR PEER REVIEW 18 
 
  
Figure 12.  Vehicle throughput and direction for the proposed adaptive tra ﬃc light.  
The above data for an adaptive tra ﬃc light can re ﬂect real-life tra ﬃc simulation since 
traﬃc density varies depending on the time of the day (morning, during the day, and in 
the afternoons or evenings). Table 6 also re ﬂects how an adaptive tra ﬃc light can provide 
more throughput of vehicles at the tra ﬃc intersection and save time for the drivers and 
passengers. 
Table 6. Results of the proposed adaptive system simulation . 
Number Direction 1 Direction 2 Direction 3 Direction 4 Total 
1 55 57 42 43 197 
2 43 43  57 45 188 
3 49 51  45 55 200 
4 55 53  56 47 211 
5 43 47  51 48 189 
6 46 54  53 54 207 
7 44 61  40 33 178 
8 42 46  55 51 194 
9 48 41  51 44 184 
10 58 50  43 41 192 
(c) Results Analysis 
All 10 simulations with di ﬀerent tra ﬃc density, when comparing the results on the 
traﬃc throughput, shows that the su ggested technique is more e ﬀective than the adaptive 
traﬃc light using SUMO. Emergency vehicles also spend less time at tra ﬃc intersections 
thanks to emergency vehicle detection in real time using the 2D-CNN model and time adjustment algorithm used in this sy stem. The graph shows the two systems ʹ performance 
at each simulation using the data in Tables 5 and 6, which were generated during the sim-
ulation of tra ﬃc lights using Pygame and SUMO, as shown in Figure 13.  
Figure 12. Vehicle throughput and direction for the proposed adaptive trafﬁc light.
The above data for an adaptive trafﬁc light can reﬂect real-life trafﬁc simulation since
trafﬁc density varies depending on the time of the day (morning, during the day, and in
the afternoons or evenings). Table 6 also reﬂects how an adaptive trafﬁc light can provide
more throughput of vehicles at the trafﬁc intersection and save time for the drivers and
passengers.Vehicles 2023 ,5 1860
Table 6. Results of the proposed adaptive system simulation.
Number Direction 1 Direction 2 Direction 3 Direction 4 Total
1 55 57 42 43 197
2 43 43 57 45 188
3 49 51 45 55 200
4 55 53 56 47 211
5 43 47 51 48 189
6 46 54 53 54 207
7 44 61 40 33 178
8 42 46 55 51 194
9 48 41 51 44 184
10 58 50 43 41 192
(c) Results Analysis
All 10 simulations with different trafﬁc density, when comparing the results on the
trafﬁc throughput, shows that the suggested technique is more effective than the adaptive
trafﬁc light using SUMO. Emergency vehicles also spend less time at trafﬁc intersections
thanks to emergency vehicle detection in real time using the 2D-CNN model and time
adjustment algorithm used in this system. The graph shows the two systems’ performance
at each simulation using the data in Tables 5 and 6, which were generated during the
simulation of trafﬁc lights using Pygame and SUMO, as shown in Figure 13.
Vehicles 2023 , 5, FOR PEER REVIEW 19 
 
  
Figure 13.  Correlation of adaptive tra ﬃc systems.  
Regardless of the distribution, the propos ed adaptive system outperforms the adap-
tive traﬃc light system in SUMO almost every time. The allocation over all four lanes was 
set to random in these scenarios. This is a common type of tra ﬃc distribution in real-world 
situations. Emergency vehicles have a high th roughput at the intersection using the pro-
posed model. 
5. Conclusions 
The proposed method ensures that the direction with the most tra ﬃc receives a 
longer green signal than the direction with the least tra ﬃc by adjusting the length of the 
signal based on the volume of tra ﬃc at the light. As a result, the proposed system design 
cleared vehicles 90% faster than the adaptive tra ﬃc light system using SUMO. This will 
reduce gasoline consumption and emissions by eliminating undesired delays, congestion, 
and waiting times. Additionally, the proposed model can recognize emergency cars and 
modify the signal timers for quicker passage  of the emergency vehicles. Using the 2D-
CNN module, emergencies can be classi ﬁed and given priority at the intersection. The 
hardware design for this project has been sa ved for future use. The initiative could be 
expanded in the future to improve tra ﬃc management and reduce congestion. The detec-
tion of accidents or malfunctio ns is a feature that can be added to improve the project. 
Because a variety of risky situations, such as angle and left-turn crashes, occur frequently 
at intersections, they are more likely to result in catastrophic accidents. To save lives and damage, as well as reduce tra ﬃc and delays, it is crucial to detect accidents accurately and 
quickly at junctions. Th is can be performed by ﬁltering out parked cars and identifying 
cars that are stopped for an extended amount of time in an uncomfortable place, like the middle of the road. Additionally, vehicles that break tra ﬃc laws can be found. Se tting a 
violation line and taking a snapshot when it is crossed while the signal is red may allow 
for the detection of cars that are running red lights in an image or video feed. Techniques 
for image processing can help with this. Syncing tra ﬃc lights at di ﬀerent crossings will 
beneﬁt commuters since once a car enters the roadway, there may be less pause, and emer-
gency vehicles can be detected at any point in  time to be given priority, not only when 
they approach the tra ﬃc intersection. Also, if emergency vehicles arrive from all direc-
tions, the system can be improved to handle situations in which an algorithm calculates 
the arrival time and urgency of each emergency vehicle and allows that particular emer-
gency vehicle to go ﬁrst. 
Author Contributions: M.J.M.: conceptualization, data analysis, investigation, writing, and experi-
ments; C.T.; P.A. and M.N.: supervising, reviewing,  and editing. All author s have read and agreed 
to the published version of the manuscript . 
Funding:  The Tshwane University of Technology funded this study. 160170180190200210220
123456789 1 0SUMO Pygame
Figure 13. Correlation of adaptive trafﬁc systems.
Regardless of the distribution, the proposed adaptive system outperforms the adaptive
trafﬁc light system in SUMO almost every time. The allocation over all four lanes was
set to random in these scenarios. This is a common type of trafﬁc distribution in real-
world situations. Emergency vehicles have a high throughput at the intersection using the
proposed model.
5. Conclusions
The proposed method ensures that the direction with the most trafﬁc receives a longer
green signal than the direction with the least trafﬁc by adjusting the length of the signal
based on the volume of trafﬁc at the light. As a result, the proposed system design cleared
vehicles 90% faster than the adaptive trafﬁc light system using SUMO. This will reduce
gasoline consumption and emissions by eliminating undesired delays, congestion, and
waiting times. Additionally, the proposed model can recognize emergency cars and modify
the signal timers for quicker passage of the emergency vehicles. Using the 2D-CNN module,
emergencies can be classiﬁed and given priority at the intersection. The hardware design
for this project has been saved for future use. The initiative could be expanded in theVehicles 2023 ,5 1861
future to improve trafﬁc management and reduce congestion. The detection of accidents or
malfunctions is a feature that can be added to improve the project. Because a variety of
risky situations, such as angle and left-turn crashes, occur frequently at intersections, they
are more likely to result in catastrophic accidents. To save lives and damage, as well as
reduce trafﬁc and delays, it is crucial to detect accidents accurately and quickly at junctions.
This can be performed by ﬁltering out parked cars and identifying cars that are stopped
for an extended amount of time in an uncomfortable place, like the middle of the road.
Additionally, vehicles that break trafﬁc laws can be found. Setting a violation line and
taking a snapshot when it is crossed while the signal is red may allow for the detection of
cars that are running red lights in an image or video feed. Techniques for image processing
can help with this. Syncing trafﬁc lights at different crossings will beneﬁt commuters
since once a car enters the roadway, there may be less pause, and emergency vehicles can
be detected at any point in time to be given priority, not only when they approach the
trafﬁc intersection. Also, if emergency vehicles arrive from all directions, the system can
be improved to handle situations in which an algorithm calculates the arrival time and
urgency of each emergency vehicle and allows that particular emergency vehicle to go ﬁrst.
Author Contributions: M.J.M.: conceptualization, data analysis, investigation, writing, and experi-
ments; C.T.; P .A. and M.N.: supervising, reviewing, and editing. All authors have read and agreed to
the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: The Tshwane University of Technology funded this study.
Data Availability Statement: Data are contained within the article.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
References
1. Deepajothi, S.; Rajan, D.P .; Karthikeyan, P .; Velliangiri, S. Intelligent trafﬁc management for emergency vehicles using convolu-
tional neural network. In Proceedings of the 2021 7th International Conference on Advanced Computing and Communication
Systems (ICACCS), Coimbatore, India, 19–20 March 2021; pp. 853–857.
2. Cristiani, A.L.; Immich, R.; Akabane, A.T.; Madeira, E.R.M.; Villas, L.A.; Meneguette, R.I. Atrip: Architecture for trafﬁc
classiﬁcation based on image processing. Vehicles 2020 ,2, 303–317. [CrossRef]
3. Mall, P .K.; Narayan, V .; Pramanik, S.; Srivastava, S.; Faiz, M.; Sriramulu, S.; Kumar, M.N. FuzzyNet-Based Modelling Smart
Trafﬁc System in Smart Cities Using Deep Learning Models. In Handbook of Research on Data-Driven Mathematical Modeling in
Smart Cities ; IGI Global: Genval, Belgium, 2023; pp. 76–95.
4. Zhou, B.; Cao, J.; Zeng, X.; Wu, H. Adaptive trafﬁc light control in wireless sensor network-based intelligent transportation
system. In Proceedings of the 2010 IEEE 72nd Vehicular Technology Conference-Fall, Ottawa, ON, Canada, 6–9 September 2010;
pp. 1–5.
5. Cano, M.-D.; Sanchez-Iborra, R.; Freire-Viteri, B.; Garcia-Sanchez, A.-J.; Garcia-Sanchez, F.; Garcia-Haro, J. A self-adaptive
approach for trafﬁc lights control in an urban network. In Proceedings of the 2017 19th International Conference on Transparent
Optical Networks (ICTON), Girona, Spain, 2–6 July 2017; pp. 1–4.
6. Zavala, B.; Alf érez, G.H. Proactive control of trafﬁc in smart cities. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (ICAI), Las Vegas, NV , USA, 27–30 July 2015; p. 604.
7. Guerrero-Ib áñez, J.; Zeadally, S.; Contreras-Castillo, J. Sensor technologies for intelligent transportation systems. Sensors 2018 ,18,
1212. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
8. Ahmed, F.; Hawas, Y. An integrated real-time trafﬁc signal system for transit signal priority, incident detection and congestion
management. Transp. Res. Part C Emerg. Technol. 2015 ,60, 52–76. [CrossRef]
9. Kareem, D.M. Coverage in Wireless Sensor Networks. Master’s Thesis, Çankaya University, Çankaya, Turkey, 2015.
10. bin Che Mansor, M.A.H.; Kamal, N.A.M.; bin Baharom, M.H.; bin Zainol, M.A. Emergency Vehicle Type Classiﬁcation using
Convolutional Neural Network. In Proceedings of the 2021 IEEE International Conference on Automatic Control & Intelligent
Systems (I2CACIS), Shah Alam, Malaysia, 26 June 2021; pp. 126–129.
11. Chen, L.; Li, S.; Bai, Q.; Yang, J.; Jiang, S.; Miao, Y. Review of image classiﬁcation algorithms based on convolutional neural
networks. Remote Sens. 2021 ,13, 4712. [CrossRef]
12. Survarachakan, S.; Pelanis, E.; Khan, Z.A.; Kumar, R.P .; Edwin, B.; Lindseth, F. Effects of enhancement on deep learning based
hepatic vessel segmentation. Electronics 2021 ,10, 1165. [CrossRef]
13. Rajasekar, T.; Mohanraj, P .; Abishek, R.; Haries, M. Adaptive Trafﬁc Congestion Control Approach with Emergency Vehicle Proto-
col. In Proceedings of the 2023 8th International Conference on Communication and Electronics Systems (ICCES), Coimbatore,
India, 1–3 June 2023; pp. 613–620.Vehicles 2023 ,5 1862
14. Pamula, T. Road trafﬁc conditions classiﬁcation based on multilevel ﬁltering of image content using convolutional neural
networks. IEEE Intell. Transp. Syst. Mag. 2018 ,10, 11–21. [CrossRef]
15. Li, Z.; Liu, F.; Yang, W.; Peng, S.; Zhou, J. A survey of convolutional neural networks: Analysis, applications, and prospects. IEEE
Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst. 2021 ,33, 6999–7019. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
16. Sun, X.; Lin, K.; Jiao, P .; Lu, H. Signal timing optimization model based on bus priority. Information 2020 ,11, 325. [CrossRef]
17. Jia, X.; Sun, C. Research on Intelligent Monitoring Technology of Trafﬁc Flow Based on Computer Vision. In Proceedings of the
2023 IEEE International Conference on Sensors, Electronics and Computer Engineering (ICSECE), Jinzhou, China, 18–20 August
2023; pp. 557–561.
18. Yogheshwaran, M.; Praveenkumar, D.; Pravin, S.; Manikandan, P .; Saravanan, D.S. IoT based intelligent trafﬁc control system. Int.
J. Eng. Technol. Res. Manag. 2020 ,4, 59–63.
19. Aggarwal, S.; Bali, R.S. A vehicular dynamics based technique for efﬁcient trafﬁc management. In Proceedings of the 2015
International Conference on Advances in Computing, Communications and Informatics (ICACCI), Kochi, India, 10–13 August
2015; pp. 2133–2138.
20. Cheng, J.; Wu, W.; Cao, J.; Li, K. Fuzzy group-based intersection control via vehicular networks for smart transportations. IEEE
Trans. Ind. Inform. 2016 ,13, 751–758. [CrossRef]
21. Rashid, H.; Ashraﬁ, M.J.F.; Azizi, M.; Heydarinezhad, M.R. Intelligent trafﬁc light control based on clustering using vehicular
ad-hoc networks. In Proceedings of the 2015 7th Conference on Information and Knowledge Technology (IKT), Urmia, Iran,
26–28 May 2015; pp. 1–6.
22. Younes, M.B.; Boukerche, A. Intelligent trafﬁc light controlling algorithms using vehicular networks. IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol.
2015 ,65, 5887–5899. [CrossRef]
23. Guo, Q.; Li, L.; Ban, X.J. Urban trafﬁc signal control with connected and automated vehicles: A survey. Transp. Res. Part C Emerg.
Technol. 2019 ,101, 313–334. [CrossRef]
24. Rosayyan, P .; Paul, J.; Subramaniam, S.; Ganesan, S.I. An optimal control strategy for emergency vehicle priority system in smart
cities using edge computing and IOT sensors. Meas. Sens. 2023 ,26, 100697. [CrossRef]
25. Nellore, K.; Hancke, G.P . Trafﬁc management for emergency vehicle priority based on visual sensing. Sensors 2016 ,16, 1892.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
26. Kavitha, Y.; Satyanarayana, P .; Mirza, S.S. Sensor based trafﬁc signal pre-emption for emergency vehicles using efﬁcient short-
range communication network. Meas. Sens. 2023 ,28, 100830. [CrossRef]
27. Chung, J.; Kim, G.; Sohn, K. Transferability of a Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) to Measure Trafﬁc Density. Electronics
2021 ,10, 1189. [CrossRef]
28. Mandal, V .; Mussah, A.R.; Jin, P .; Adu-Gyamﬁ, Y. Artiﬁcial intelligence-enabled trafﬁc monitoring system. Sustainability 2020 ,12,
9177. [CrossRef]
29. Luo, H.; Yang, Y.; Tong, B.; Wu, F.; Fan, B. Trafﬁc sign recognition using a multi-task convolutional neural network. IEEE Trans.
Intell. Transp. Syst. 2017 ,19, 1100–1111. [CrossRef]
30. Li, Q.; Peng, Z.; Feng, L.; Duan, C.; Mo, W.; Zhou, B. ScenarioNet: Open-Source Platform for Large-Scale Trafﬁc Scenario
Simulation and Modeling. arXiv 2023 , arXiv:2306.12241.
Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.